7

Deep learning-based groundwater storage estimation from
seismic data
T. Lähivaara1, A. Malehmir2, A. Pasanen3, L. Kärkkäinen4, J.M.J. Huttunen5, J.S. Hesthaven6
1

University of Eastern Finland; 2 Uppsala University; 3 Geological Survey of Finland; 4 Aalto
University; 5 Nokia Bell Labs; 6 Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Summary
In this work, an inverse problem of estimating the water table level and actual stored water in an aquifer from
seismic data is studied. Both the elastic and poroviscoelastic wave equations are used to model wave propagation
in the ground. The equations are spatially discretized using a nodal discontinuous Galerkin method, while
temporally using the explicit low-storage Runge-Kutta method. The actual inverse problem is solved using a deep
learning approach based the convolutional neural networks. Our simulation results suggest that the neural
network-based method can be used to accurately estimate the water table level and stored water from noisy data.

Second EAGE Conference on Seismic Inversion
7-9 February 2022, Porto | Online Event

Introduction
The developed computational techniques can be used to tackle current critical barriers towards an
accurate characterization of groundwater resources. Detailed knowledge of the underground water
storage (aquifer) properties and subsurface parameters is crucial in aquifer management, for example,
to planning aquifer protection and prevent water level drawdown.
Seismic imaging provides a potential framework to characterize and monitor aquifers, consisting of
layers of porous substrates. Seismic surveys are often done by placing a set of receivers, i.e., geophones
or accelerometers, on the ground surface, after which a seismic source is generated at one or more
locations. Vibrators or man-made impacts (impulsive sources) are typically used as such sources. The
generated seismic wavefield interacts with the medium and hence the poroelastic signature of the
aquifer can be captured in data. Therefore, recorded seismic signals can be used, with efficient
numerical techniques, to increase the knowledge of the groundwater reservoir state.
In this simulation study, we use a high-order accurate discontinuous Galerkin method (Hesthaven and
Warburton 2007) to simulate seismic wave propagation in coupled elastic-poroviscoelastic media while
a convolutional neural network (CNN) (Buduma 2017) is applied for solving the actual inverse problem.
In the inverse problem, the network is trained to recover either the water table level or the actual stored
water. We build a training and validation database for the CNN algorithm and test its performance by
applying the CNN to a separate testing dataset.
Model configuration
As a test case, we consider a 48 metres long model domain, which consists of three subdomains, see
Figure 1. Right below the top surface, we assume an air-saturated porous layer, followed by a watersaturated porous layer, and finally an elastic (low porosity) bedrock layer. The interface between airand water-saturated layers is the water table. A total of 38 receivers are placed on the ground surface,
and they are used to capture the vertical velocity data. The data is generated using 10 force-type point
sources, which are placed at a depth of 0.5 m from the ground surface. The force is parallel to the
negative vertical axis. To illustrate wave propagation in the studied case, Figure 1 also shows an
example of the total velocity field.

Figure 1 An example realization of the problem geometry. Figure also includes an example snapshot
of the total velocity field. The selected sample contains a sharp discontinuity in the basement profile.
As the physical model for the wave propagation model, we use the coupled poroviscoelastic-elastic
model studied in Dudley Ward et al. 2017. The aquifer is modeled as a fully saturated porous material,
based on the Biot theory, while the bedrock layer is modeled as an elastic layer. As a boundary condition
(BC) configuration, we set outflow condition on the left, bottom, and right boundaries while the top
surface is modelled with free BC.

Second EAGE Conference on Seismic Inversion

In this study, both the problem geometry (water table level and basement) and physical parameters are
unknown. Simulated training and validation datasets for neural networks are generated by randomizing
the problem geometry and physical parameters for different subdomains. The unknown material
parameters are generated using an isotropic Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process while the basement geometry
is a realization of the Matern field, for detailed discussion we refer to Lähivaara et al. 2019 and
references therein. The water table level, i.e., the line parallel to the horizontal axis, can vary between
the ground surface and basement. The physical parameters for air and water are assumed be known
accurately. To illustrate the realization process, two examples of the porosity fields are shown in Figure
2 (a). Visualized cases are selected so that the amount of stored groundwater is low (left) or high (right).
Figure 2 (b) shows the noiseless shot records corresponding to the geometries visualized on top. In this
study, the collected data is assumed to be the vertical solid velocity component. From the shot records,
we can easily see direct arrival and reflection from the basement boundary. In addition, the collected
responses show clearly multiple reflections from different interfaces.

Figure 2 Two example porosity fields (a) and the corresponding simulated vertical velocity data (b).
The porosity values are given in percentages. Selected results correspond to samples where the amount
of stored water is low (left) or high (right). On top, the source location (red x symbol) and water table
level (horizontal blue line) are also visualized .

Figure 3 Graphical illustration of the neural network architecture used in this work.

Deep convolutional neural networks
The neural network architecture used in our study comprises two convolutional layers with max-pooling
and two fully connected layers. The details of the architecture are presented in Figure 3. The architecture

Second EAGE Conference on Seismic Inversion

was found after carrying out experiments with different network architectures and the selected network
provided good performance with a reasonable number of unknowns.
Training, validation, and test datasets
For the training of the CNN, we generated a dataset comprising 15,000 samples. Computational grids
were generated based on the randomized geometry (see above) and had ~3.5 elements per wavelength.
To monitor the network's generalization capabilities during training and for model selection, we
generated an additional validation dataset of 3,000 samples. To further control the numerical accuracy
of the discontinuous Galerkin-based wave solver, the order of the polynomial basis approximation in
each triangle element of the computational grid can vary (Lähivaara and Huttunen 2011). Figure 4
shows an example of the computational grid and the corresponding basis order distribution.

Figure 4 An example grid used in the computations. Colorbar shows the order of the basis functions.
To train the model to tolerate the presence of measurement noise, the samples were corrupted with
Gaussian noise. Each of the simulated samples were multiplied five times and corrupted with variable
levels of noise as
𝑋𝑖noised = 𝑋𝑖 + 𝐴αϵA + 𝐵|𝑋𝑖 |ϵB ,
where 𝑋𝑖 is the data of ith training sample, α is the maximum absolute value of the training dataset, and
ϵA/B are independent zero-mean Gaussian random variables. The first added noise component
represents additive white noise, and the second noise component represents noise with magnitude
relative to the velocity signal amplitude. The coefficients A and B for each sample were randomly
chosen. The standard deviations (STDs) of the first term varies logarithmically between (0.03-5)% α,
and the STDs of the second term is between (0-5)% |𝑋𝑖 |. Total number of samples in the training dataset
is 5 x 15,000 = 75,000.
The performance was evaluated using two test sets. The first set consisting of 3,000 samples was
generated with the same approach as in the generation of the training set. In addition, to study the
network’s extrapolation capabilities, the second test set was generated to consist of 200 samples that
contain two jumps in the basement profile. For the samples in the test datasets, the computational grids
were set to have ~4 elements per wavelength.

Results
Figure 5 shows estimates for the test data, contaminated with the noise generated with parameters A =
2.3% and B = 5.5%. Estimates are shown for both stored water (left) and water table level (middle). To
test the networks extrapolation capabilities, we also show the results of the 200 additional test samples
in which the basement profile contains two discontinuities. Note that, in the training data, the basement
can contain only one discontinuity. The estimation accuracy is very good for all samples and for
estimated parameters. The figures also include relative prediction error histograms (bottom) and two
example noisy and noiseless signals (right).

Second EAGE Conference on Seismic Inversion

Figure 5 Estimates for the amounts of stored water (top left), water table levels (top middle), and
example velocity signals for noisy (black) and noiseless (green) data for the test data (right). Bottom
row (left) and (middle) shows the histograms of the relative prediction error (i.e., difference between
the estimated and true values). On top, red diamond symbols show the additional test samples that have
two jumps in the basement profile. Here the noise parameters A = 2.3% and B = 5.5%.
Conclusions
Results of this study support that the neural networks can be used to estimate the aquifer quantities of
interest, i.e., the water table level and actual stored water, from seismic data. The error histograms for
both estimated quantities show promising accuracy in terms of relative prediction error and bias. In
addition to the promising estimation accuracy, the estimates are obtained in a very fast manner once the
time-consuming database generation and network training phase are done.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Academy of Finland (Finnish Centre of Excellence of Inverse
Modelling and Imaging) and project 321761. The authors also wish to acknowledge CSC-IT Center for
Science, Finland, for computational resources.
References
Buduma, N. [2017]. Fundamentals of Deep Learning, Designing Next- Generation Machine
Intelligence Algorithms. O’Reilly Media, Newton, MA.
Dudley Ward, N.F., Lähivaara, T. and Eveson, S. [2017]. A discontinuous Galerkin method for
poroelastic wave propagation: two-dimensional case. Journal of Computational Physics 350, 690-727.
Hesthaven, J.S. and Warburton, T. [2007]. Nodal Discontinuous Galerkin Methods: Algorithms,
Analysis, and Applications, Springer.
Lähivaara, T. and Huttunen, T. [2011]. A non-uniform basis order for the discontinuous Galerkin
method of the acoustic and elastic wave equations. Applied Numerical Mathematics 61, 473-486.
Lähivaara, T., Malehmir, A., Pasanen, A., Kärkkäinen, L., Huttunen, J.M.J. and Hesthaven, J.S. [2019].
Estimation of groundwater storage from seismic data using deep learning. Geophysical Prospecting 67,
2115-2126.

Second EAGE Conference on Seismic Inversion

