Seismic Velocity Inversion via Physical Embedding Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
Seismic velocity inversion is one of the most critical issues in the field of seismic exploration and has long been the focus of numerous experts and scholars. In recent years, the advancement of machine learning technologies has infused new vitality into the research of seismic velocity inversion and yielded a wealth of research outcomes. Typically, seismic velocity inversion based on machine learning lacks control over physical processes and interpretability. Starting from wave theory and the physical processes of seismic data acquisition, this paper proposes a method for seismic velocity model inversion based on Physical Embedding Recurrent Neural Networks. Firstly, the wave equation is a mathematical representation of the physical process of acoustic waves propagating through a medium, and the finite difference method is an effective approach to solving the wave equation. With this in mind, we introduce the architecture of recurrent neural networks to describe the finite difference solution of the wave equation, realizing the embedding of physical processes into machine learning. Secondly, in seismic data acquisition, the propagation of acoustic waves from multiple sources through the medium represents a high-dimensional causal time series (wavefield snapshots), where the influential variable is the velocity model, and the received signals are the observations of the wavefield. This forms a forward modeling process as the forward simulation of the wavefield equation, and the use of error back-propagation between observations and calculations as the velocity inversion process. Through time-lapse inversion and by incorporating the causal information of wavefield propagation, the non-uniqueness issue in velocity inversion is mitigated. Through mathematical derivations and theoretical model analyses, the effectiveness and rationality of the method are demonstrated. In conjunction with simulation results for complex models, the method proposed in this paper can achieve velocity inversion in complex geological structures.
velocity modeling; seismic waveform inversion; physical information neural network; causal sequence