near-real-time near-surface 3d seismic velocity and uncertainty models by wavefield gradiometry and neural network inversion of ambient seismic noise
with the advent of large and dense seismic arrays, novel, cheap, and fast imaging and inversion methods are needed to exploit the information captured by stations in close proximity to each other and produce results in near real time. we have developed a sequence of fast seismic acquisition for dispersion curve extraction and inversion for 3d seismic models, based on wavefield gradiometry, wave equation inversion, and machine-learning technology. the seismic array method that we use is helmholtz wave equation inversion using measured wavefield gradients, and the dispersion curve inversions are based on a mixture of density neural networks (nns). for our approach, we assume that a single surface wave mode dominates the data. we derive a nonlinear relationship among the unknown true seismic wave velocities, the measured seismic wave velocities, the interstation spacing, and the noise level in the signal. first with synthetic and then with the field data, we find that this relationship can be solved for unknown true seismic wave velocities using fixed point iterations. to estimate the noise level in the data, we need to assume that the effect of noise varies weakly with the frequency and we need to be able to calibrate the retrieved average dispersion curves with an alternate method (e.g., frequency wavenumber analysis). the method is otherwise self-contained and produces phase velocity estimates with tens of minutes of noise recordings. we use nns, specifically a mixture density network, to approximate the nonlinear mapping between dispersion curves and their underlying 1d velocity profiles. the networks turn the retrieved dispersion model into a 3d seismic velocity model in a matter of seconds. this opens the prospect of near-real-time near-surface seismic velocity estimation using dense (and potentially rolling) arrays and only ambient seismic energy.

rapid seismic waveform modeling and inversion  with neural operators
seismic waveform modeling is a powerful tool for determining earth structure models and unraveling earthquake rupture processes, but it is usually computationally expensive. we introduce a scheme to vastly accelerate these calculations with a recently developed machine learning paradigm called the neural operator. once trained, these models can simulate a full wavefield at negligible cost. we use a u-shaped neural operator to learn a general solution operator to the 2d elastic wave equation from an ensemble of numerical simulations performed with random velocity models and source locations. we show that full waveform modeling with neural operators is nearly two orders of magnitude faster than conventional numerical methods, and more importantly, the trained model enables accurate simulation for velocity models, source locations, and mesh discretization distinctly different from the training dataset. the method also enables convenient full-waveform inversion with automatic differentiation.
geophysics, machine learning, partial differential equations (pdes), waveform modeling, full-waveform inversion



seismic waveform inversion using a neural network-based forward
the purpose of seismic waveform inversion is to obtain a geological model that is optimally fitted to the predicted seismic record and the measured seismic record. since the forward model is repeatedly called during the inversion process, in order to improve efficiency, an efficient forward calculation method must be employed. in this study, we take a 2d wave equation as an example and propose a deep learning method as a forward model to minimize the prediction error value of seismic records. and the velocity inversion test of the marmousi model is carried out by conjugate gradient method. numerical experiments show that compared with the traditional finite difference method, the method can greatly reduce the calculation amount and improve the calculation efficiency.

underground hydrogen storage leakage detection and characterization based on machine learning of sparse seismic data
underground hydrogen storage (uhs) is considered as a scalable approach for massive storage and seasonal extraction of hydrogen (h2). although conventional leakage detection and characterization methods based on time-lapse seismic imaging and inversion generally apply to h2 leakage detection problem, a high-fidelity yet cost effective geophysics approach is still missing to reliably inform leakage location and properties based on very sparse data. in response, we develop a novel supervised machine learning method to detect and characterize h2 leakage from uhs. the input to our neural network are sparse time-lapse seismic waveforms, while the output from the neural network includes the spatial location and physical properties of a h2 leakage. we generate high-quality time-lapse waveforms using the elastic-wave equations to train the neural network. we train and validate our machine learning model and find that it attains high accuracy in using extremely sparse time-lapse seismic data to detect and characterize h2 leakage. our investigation is the first systematic study that focuses on applying machine learning to subsurface h2 leakage detection and characterization and could potentially serve as a cost-effective geophysical tool for underground hydrogen leakage detection and characterization with high fidelity.
underground hydrogen storage hydrogen leakage detection sparse seismic data machine learning

an empirical analysis of the influence of seismic data modeling for estimating velocity models with fully convolutional networks
seismic modeling is the process of simulating wave propagations in a medium to represent underlying structures of a subsurface area of the earth. this modeling is based on a set of parameters that determine how the data is produced. recent studies have demonstrated that deep learning methods can be trained with seismic data to estimate velocity models that give a representation of the subsurface where the seismic data was generated. thus, an analysis is made on the impact that different sets of parameters have on the estimation of velocity models by a fully convolutional network (fcn). the experiments varied the number of sources among four options (1, 10, 25 or 50 shots) and used three different ranges of peak frequencies: 4, 8 and 16 hz. the results demonstrated that, although the number of sources have more influence on the computational time needed to train the fcn than the peak frequency, both changes have significant impact on the quality of the estimation. the best estimations were obtained with the experiment of 25 sources with 4 hz and increasing the peak frequency to 8 hz improved even more the results, especially regarding the fcn’s loss function.
deep learning, geophysics, velocity model estimation, seismic data analysis, fully convolutional networks.

physics informed neural networks for velocity inversion
in this abstract, a new neural network, physics-informed neural networks (pinns) (m. raissi, 2019) are introduced and implemented to solve the inversion problems of wave equations. pinns employ standard feedforward neural networks (nns) with the partial differential equations (pdes) explicitly encoded into the nn using automatic differentiation, while the sum of the mean-squared error in initial/boundary conditions is minimized with respect to the nn parameters. specifically, here we use this network structure to produce an accurate velocity model from seismic data. our approach relies on training deep neural networks that are extended to encode the acoustic wave equation. in the first case, given analytical solution to an initial boundary value problem (ibvp) to infer very accurately the velocity parameter. in the second case, given seismic wavefield data in space-time, we use several coupled deep neural networks to infer vary accuracy the velocity field. after compared the results with full waveform inversion (fwi), the promising results for synthetic 2d data demonstrate a new way of using seismic data to identify key structures in the subsurface from machine learning approaches.

encoder–decoder architecture for 3d seismic inversion
inverting seismic data to build 3d geological structures is a challenging task due to the overwhelming amount of acquired seismic data, and the very-high computational load due to iterative numerical solutions of the wave equation, as required by industry-standard tools such as full waveform inversion (fwi). for example, in an area with surface dimensions of 4.5 km × 4.5 km, hundreds of seismic shot-gather cubes are required for 3d model reconstruction, leading to terabytes of recorded data. this paper presents a deep learning solution for the reconstruction of realistic 3d models in the presence of field noise recorded in seismic surveys. we implement and analyze a convolutional encoder–decoder architecture that efficiently processes the entire collection of hundreds of seismic shot-gather cubes. the proposed solution demonstrates that realistic 3d models can be reconstructed with a structural similarity index measure (ssim) of 0.9143 (out of 1.0) in the presence of field noise at 10 db signal-to-noise ratio.
3d reconstruction; seismic inversion; seismic velocity; inverse problems; deep learning; transfer learning; encoder–decoder

revisit geophysical imaging in a new view of physics-informed generative adversarial learning
seismic full waveform inversion (fwi) is a powerful geophysical imaging technique that produces high-resolution subsurface models by iteratively minimizing the misfit between the simulated and observed seismograms. unfortunately, conventional fwi with least-squares function suffers from many drawbacks such as the local-minima problem and computation of explicit gradient. it is particularly challenging with the contaminated measurements or poor starting models. recent works relying on partial differential equations and neural networks show promising performance for two-dimensional fwi. inspired by the competitive learning of generative adversarial networks, we proposed an unsupervised learning paradigm that integrates wave equation with a discriminate network to accurately estimate the physically consistent models in a distribution sense. our framework needs no labelled training data nor pretraining of the network, is flexible to achieve multi-parameters inversion with minimal user interaction. the proposed method faithfully recovers the well-known synthetic models that outperforms the classical algorithms. furthermore, our work paves the way to sidestep the local-minima issue via reducing the sensitivity to initial models and noise.
seismic full waveform inversion · unsupervised learning · acoustic wave equation · generative adversarial network · wasserstein distance

robust full waveform inversion with deep hessian deblurring
full waveform inversion (fwi) is a technique widely used in geophysics to obtain high-resolution subsurface velocity models from waveform seismic data. due to its large computation cost, most flavors of fwi rely only on the computation of the gradient of the loss function to estimate the update direction, therefore ignoring the contribution of the hessian. depending on the level of computational resources one can afford, an approximate of the inverse of the hessian can be calculated and used to speed up the convergence of fwi towards the global (or a plausible local) minimum. in this work, we propose to use an approximate hessian computed from a linearization of the wave-equation as commonly done in least-squares migration (lsm). more precisely, we rely on the link between a migrated image and a doubly migrated image (i.e., an image obtained by demigration-migration of the migrated image) to estimate the inverse of the hessian. however, instead of using non-stationary compact filters to link the two images and approximate the hessian, we propose to use a deep neural network to directly learn the mapping between the fwi gradient (output) and its hessian (blurred) counterpart (input). by doing so, the network learns to act as an approximate inverse hessian: as such, when the trained network is applied to the fwi gradient, an enhanced update direction is obtained, which is shown to be beneficial for the convergence of fwi. the weights of the trained (deblurring) network are then transferred to the next fwi iteration to expedite convergence. we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach on two synthetic datasets and a field dataset.
full waveform inversion · imaging · born modeling · deep learning · neural networks

seismic velocity inversion via physical embedding recurrent neural networks (rnn)
seismic velocity inversion is one of the most critical issues in the field of seismic exploration and has long been the focus of numerous experts and scholars. in recent years, the advancement of machine learning technologies has infused new vitality into the research of seismic velocity inversion and yielded a wealth of research outcomes. typically, seismic velocity inversion based on machine learning lacks control over physical processes and interpretability. starting from wave theory and the physical processes of seismic data acquisition, this paper proposes a method for seismic velocity model inversion based on physical embedding recurrent neural networks. firstly, the wave equation is a mathematical representation of the physical process of acoustic waves propagating through a medium, and the finite difference method is an effective approach to solving the wave equation. with this in mind, we introduce the architecture of recurrent neural networks to describe the finite difference solution of the wave equation, realizing the embedding of physical processes into machine learning. secondly, in seismic data acquisition, the propagation of acoustic waves from multiple sources through the medium represents a high-dimensional causal time series (wavefield snapshots), where the influential variable is the velocity model, and the received signals are the observations of the wavefield. this forms a forward modeling process as the forward simulation of the wavefield equation, and the use of error back-propagation between observations and calculations as the velocity inversion process. through time-lapse inversion and by incorporating the causal information of wavefield propagation, the non-uniqueness issue in velocity inversion is mitigated. through mathematical derivations and theoretical model analyses, the effectiveness and rationality of the method are demonstrated. in conjunction with simulation results for complex models, the method proposed in this paper can achieve velocity inversion in complex geological structures.
velocity modeling; seismic waveform inversion; physical information neural network; causal sequence

physics informed machine learning: seismic wave equation
similar to many fields of sciences, recent deep learning advances have been applied extensively in geosciences for both small- and large-scale problems. however, the necessity of using large training data and the ‘black box’ nature of learning have limited them in practice and difficult to interpret. furthermore, including the governing equations and physical facts in such methods is also another challenge, which entails either ignoring the physics or simplifying them using unrealistic data. to address such issues, physics informed machine learning methods have been developed which can integrate the governing physics law into the learning process. in this work, a 1dimensional (1d) time-dependent seismic wave equation is considered and solved using two methods, namely gaussian process (gp) and physics informed neural networks. we show that these meshless methods are trained by smaller amount of data and can predict the solution of the equation with even high accuracy. they are also capable of inverting any parameter involved in the governing equation such as wave velocity in our case. results show that the gp can predict the solution of the seismic wave equation with a lower level of error, while our developed neural network is more accurate for velocity (p- and s-wave) and density inversion.
gaussian process (gp) physics informed machine learning (piml) seismic wave optimization

enhancing one-way wave equation-based migration with deep learning
one advantage of one-way wave equation-based migration is its low computational cost. however, due to the limited wavefield propagation angle, it is difficult to use one-way wave equationbased migration for high-precision imaging of structures with large inclinations due to issues such as inaccurate amplitudes and migration image artifacts. in addition, when the model has large horizontal velocity differences, it is difficult for the oneway wave propagator to calculate an accurate wavefield phase. reverse time migration (rtm) based on the two-way wave propagator has a high resolution and avoids the issues associated with one-way wave propagators; however, it has a high computational cost in practical applications. we develop a convolutional neural network (cnn) application mode that improves one  migration method by learning from another one and design a cnn with a structure similar to u-net that combines the advantages of both migration methods. the cnn label is the rtm result, and the corresponding input is the result of one-way wave migration with a generalized screen propagator (gsp). the trained cnn model improves the amplitude in the one-way wave migration image and removes the errors caused by large lateral velocity perturbations. moreover, by maintaining the high migration calculation efficiency, our cnn model allows for a high resolution, few artifacts, and accurate images of steep structures in the one-way wave migration result. with our method, the accuracy of the one-way wave migration result is close to that of the rtm result. the use of gsp-based migration in our cnn model rather than conventional rtm to generate prospecting images can considerably reduce the calculation costs.

seismic wave propagation and inversion with neural operators
seismic wave propagation forms the basis for most aspects of seismological research, yet solving the wave equation is a major computational burden that inhibits the progress of research. this is exacerbated by the fact that new simulations must be performed whenever the velocity structure or source location is perturbed. here, we explore a prototype framework for learning general solutions using a recently developed machine learning paradigm called neural operator. a trained neural operator can compute a solution in negligible time for any velocity structure or source location. we develop a scheme to train neural operators on an ensemble of simulations performed with random velocity models and source locations. as neural operators are grid free, it is possible to evaluate solutions on higher resolution velocity models than trained on, providing additional computational efficiency. we illustrate the method with the 2d acoustic wave equation and demonstrate the method’s applicability to seismic tomography, using reverse-mode automatic differentiation to compute gradients of the wavefield with respect to the velocity structure. the developed procedure is nearly an order of magnitude faster than using conventional numerical methods for full waveform inversion.


low-frequency marine seismic data reconstruction based on the far-field signature using a modified u-net
preserving low-frequency components in seismic data is challenging due to data acquisition restrictions and the processing of low-cut filtering after surveys. if seismic data lack low frequencies, their resolution deteriorates, leading to inaccurate seismic interpretations. to resolve this problem, we developed a low-frequency reconstruction that employs a modified u-net neural network. to improve the training of the neural network, we generated training data analogous to unseen data, based on the far-field signature as the wavelet source to retain the spectral characteristics of field data. we addressed potential overfitting by generating a large amount of various synthetic data through wave equation-based modelling using a variety of velocity and density models. after synthesising the seismic data, we implemented a filtering method to produce input data with insufficient low frequencies and label data with sufficient low frequencies. the far-field signature plays an important role in the successful reconstruction of low frequencies due to its intrinsic field data features and greater low-frequency information compared to field data alone. we tested the generalisation of the network using unseen synthetic and field data not used in the training stage, and analyzed the results in the time and frequency domains. although the input data did not retain frequencies below 10 hz, the trained network predicted low frequencies that were similar to the desired data. we also produced post-stack sections via simple processing to evaluate low-frequency reconstructions produced by our trained network. the low-frequency reconstruction scheme led to a better understanding of subsurface media.
band-limited data; deep learning; far-field signature; low-frequency reconstruction; modified u-net

parametric elastic full waveform inversion with convolutional neural network
elastic full waveform inversion (efwi) is a powerful tool for estimating elastic models by reducing the misfit between multi-component seismic records and simulated data. however, when multiple parameters are updated simultaneously, the gradients of the loss function with respect to these parameters will be coupled together, the effect exacerbate the nonlinear problem. we propose a parametric efwi method based on convolutional neural networks (cnn-efwi). the parameters that need to be updated are the weights in the neural network rather than the elastic models. the convolutional kernel in the network can increase spatial correlations of elastic models, which can be regard as a regularization strategy to mitigate local minima issue. furthermore, the representation also can mitigate the cross-talk between parameters due to the reconstruction of frechét derivatives by neural networks. both forward and backward processes are implemented using a time-domain finitedifference solver for elastic wave equation. numerical examples on overthrust models, fluid saturated models and 2004 bp salt body models demonstrate that cnn-efwi can partially mitigate the local minima problem and reduce the dependence of inversion on the initial models. mini-batch configuration is used to speed up the update and achieve fast convergence. in addition, the inversion of noisy data further verifies the robustness of cnn-efwi.
full waveform inversion · parametric · machine learning · convolutional neural network

deep learning seismic substructure detection using the frozen  gaussian approximation
we propose a deep learning algorithm for seismic interface and pocket detection with neural networks trained by synthetic high-frequency displacement data efficiently generated by the frozen gaussian approximation (fga). in seismic imaging high-frequency data is advantageous since it can provide high resolution of substructures. however, generation of sufficient synthetic high-frequency data sets for training neural networks is computationally challenging. this bottleneck is overcome by a highly scalable computational platform built upon the fga, which comes from the semiclassical theory and approximates the wavefields by a sum of fixed-width (frozen) gaussian wave packets. training data for deep neural networks is generated from a forward simulation of the elastic wave equation using the fga. this data contains accurate traveltime information (from the ray path) but not exact amplitude information (with asymptotic errors not shrinking to zero even at extremely fine numerical resolution). using this data we build convolutional neural network models using an open source api, geoseg, developed using keras and tensorflow. on a simple model, networks, despite only being trained on data generated by the fga, can detect an interface with a high success rate from displacement data generated by the spectral element method. benchmark tests are done for p-waves (acoustic) and p- and swaves (elastic) generated using the fga and a spectral element method. further, results with a high accuracy are shown for more complicated geometries including a three-layered model, a sine interface, and a 2d-pocket model where the neural networks are trained by both clean and noisy data.
seismic tomography, convolutional neural network, elastic wave equation, high-frequency wavefield, frozen gaussian approximation, image segmentation

deep neural helmholtz operators for 3d elastic wave  propagation and inversion
numerical simulations of seismic wave propagation in heterogeneous 3d media are central to investigating subsurface structures and understanding earthquake processes, yet are computationally expensive for large problems. this is particularly problematic for full waveform inversion, which typically involves numerous runs of the forward process. in machine learning there has been considerable recent work in the area of operator learning, with a new class of models called neural operators allowing for data-driven solutions to partial differential equations. recent works in seismology have shown that when neural operators are adequately trained, they can significantly shorten the compute time for wave propagation. however, the memory required for the 3d time domain equations may be prohibitive. in this study, we show that these limitations can be overcome by solving the wave equations in the frequency domain, also known as the helmholtz equations, since the solutions for a set of frequencies can be determined in parallel. the 3d helmholtz neural operator is 40 times more memory-efficient than an equivalent time-domain version. we employ a u-shaped neural operator for 2d and 3d elastic wave modeling, achieving two orders of magnitude acceleration compared to a baseline spectral element method. the neural operator accurately generalizes to variable velocity structures and can be evaluated on denser input meshes than used in the training simulations. we also show that when solving for wavefields strictly on the surface, the accuracy can be significantly improved via a graph neural operator layer. in leveraging automatic differentiation, the proposed method can serve as an alternative to the adjoint-state approach for 3d full-waveform inversion, reducing the computation time by a factor of 350.
3d elastic wave propagation; helmholtz equations; machine learning; neural operators; full-waveform inversion; automatic differentiation.

autoencoded elastic wave-equation traveltime  inversion: toward reliable near-surface tomogram
due to unexpected environmental variations and poor consistencies in land data acquisition, complex near-surface seismograms are usually polluted unreasonably with a low signalto-noise ratio (snr). these complicated circumstances bring more challenges in identifying accurate first arrivals for the following wave-equation traveltime (wt) inversion. recently, the autoencoder (ae) is a typical unsupervised learning network, whose basic principle is to compress the input seismic data for their intrinsic features in the latent space with an encoder and, thereafter, to decipher these features for seismic profiles as the output with a decoder. this process is fully automatic with high stability and is not very sensitive to data quality. in this article, we propose an elastic wt inversion algorithm based on the ae method (aewt) to invert the p-velocity model. compared with the standard wt, the aewt method automatically extracts the intrinsic features of the refractions with ae as reference data for the misfit functionals. feature images in the latent space show similar but intensified sensitivity to the traveltimes with respect to velocity perturbations. we present one synthetic and two field data tests for comparing the proposed aewt and the standard wt tomograms to investigate the locations of a buried fault and the depth of a buried sinkhole. all these experiments demonstrate that the proposed elastic aewt method can reduce errors caused by low snr and obtain a more reliable and stable p-velocity tomogram.
autoencoder (ae), elastic and acoustic waves, velocity tomogram, wave-equation traveltime (wt) inversion.

seismic inversion based on acoustic wave  equations using physics-informed  neural network
seismic inversion is a significant tool for exploring the structure and characteristics of the underground. however, the conventional inversion strategy strongly depends on the initial model. in this work, we employ the physics-informed neural network (pinn) to estimate the velocity and density fields based on acoustic wave equations. in contrast to the traditional purely data-driven machine learning approaches, pinns leverage both available data and the physical laws that govern the observed data during the training stage. in this work, the first-order acoustic wave equations are embedded in the loss function as a regularization term for training the neural networks. in addition to the limited amount of measurements about the state variables available at the surface being used as the observational data, the well logging data is also used as the direct observational data about the model parameters. the numerical results from several benchmark problems demonstrate that given noise-free or noisy data, the proposed inversion strategy is not only capable of predicting the seismograms, but also estimating the velocity and density fields accurately. finally, we remark that although the absorbing boundary conditions are not imposed in the proposed method, the reflected waves do not appear from the artificial boundary in the predicted seismograms.
acoustic wave equations, data normalization, physics-informed neural network (pinn), seismic inversion.

seismic velocity inversion based on physically constrained neural networks
the propagation velocity of seismic waves is a crucial parameter in seismic exploration, encompassing the entire process of seismic data acquisition, processing, and interpretation. traditional model-driven full-waveform inversion (fwi) methods, which rely on an initial velocity, suffer from low computational efficiency. conversely, data-driven deep-learning (dl) approaches heavily rely on extensive training data and lack interpretability due to overreliance on training data for generalization. to address these challenges, we present a seismic velocity inversion network model that incorporates prior knowledge and constraints based on physical laws. the proposed approach involves constructing a data-driven inversion network with dual encoders and single decoder structure, enabling the learning of nonlinear mappings from seismic data to velocity models. by incorporating prior well-logging data and attention mechanisms, the inversion process is improved. in addition, a seismic forward modeling network based on recurrent neural networks (rnns) is developed to solve the acoustic wave equation. leveraging the advantages of parallel computing, the forward modeling process achieves fast calculations. the automatic differentiation algorithm in dl facilitates gradient calculations, specifically back propagation of the residuals to incorporate the physical constraints. ultimately, the proposed seismic velocity inversion network combines the two network structures while incorporating the constraint of wave field extrapolation law. numerical experiments demonstrate that this network exhibits advantages in terms of result accuracy and model generalization.
attention mechanism, physical constraints, prior logging, recurrent neural network (rnn), velocity inversion.

surrogate regression modelling for fast seismogram generation and detection of microseismic events in heterogeneous velocity models
given a 3d heterogeneous velocity model with a few million voxels, fast generation of accurate seismic  responses at specified receiver positions from known microseismic event locations is a well-known  challenge in geophysics, since it typically involves numerical solution of the computationally expensive  elastic wave equation. thousands of such forward simulations are often a routine requirement for  parameter estimation of microseimsic events via a suitable source inversion process. parameter  estimation based on forward modelling is often advantageous over a direct regression-based inversion  approach when there are unknown number of parameters to be estimated and the seismic data has  complicated noise characteristics which may not always allow a stable and unique solution in a direct  inversion process. in this paper, starting from graphics processing unit (gpu) based synthetic  simulations of a few thousand forward seismic shots due to microseismic events via pseudo-spectral  solution of elastic wave equation, we develop a step-by-step process to generate a surrogate regression  modelling framework, using machine learning techniques that can produce accurate seismograms at  specified receiver locations. the trained surrogate models can then be used as a high-speed metamodel/emulator or proxy for the original full elastic wave propagator to generate seismic responses for  other microseismic event locations also. the accuracies of the surrogate models have been evaluated using two independent sets of training and testing latin hypercube (lh) quasi-random samples, drawn  from a heterogeneous marine velocity model. the predicted seismograms have been used thereafter to  calculate batch likelihood functions, with specified noise characteristics. finally, the trained models on  23 receivers placed at the sea-bed in a marine velocity model are used to determine the maximum  likelihood estimate (mle) of the event locations which can in future be used in a bayesian analysis for  microseismic event detection.
synthetic seismogram generation, time domain compression, surrogate meta-model,  microseismic event detection, gaussian process regression.

high-frequency wavefield extrapolation using the fourier neural operator
in seismic wave simulation, solving the wave equation in the frequency domain requires calculating the inverse of the impedance matrix. the total cost strictly depends on the number of frequency components that are considered, if using a finite-difference method. for the applications such as seismic imaging and inversion, high-frequency information is always required and thus the wave simulation is always a challenging task as it demands tremendous computational cost for obtaining dispersion-free high-frequency wavefields for large subsurface models. this paper demonstrates that a data-driven machine learning method, called the fourier neural operator (fno), is capable of predicting high-frequency wavefields, based on a limited number of low-frequency components. as the fno method is for the first time applied to seismic wavefield extrapolation, the experiment reveals three attractive features with fno: high efficiency, high accuracy and, importantly, the predicted high-frequency wavefields are dispersion free.
dispersion free, fourier neural operator, high-frequency wavefield, machine learning, wavefield extrapolation

multiple-input fourier neural operator (mifno) for  source-dependent 3d elastodynamics
numerical simulations are essential tools to evaluate the solution of the wave equation in complex settings, such as three-dimensional (3d) domains with heterogeneous properties. however, their application is limited by high computational costs and existing surrogate models lack the flexibility of numerical solvers. this work introduces the multiple-input fourier neural operator (mifno) to deal with structured 3d fields representing material properties as well as vectors describing the source characteristics. the mifno is applied to the problem of elastic wave propagation in the earth’s crust. it is trained on the hemews-3d database containing 30 000 earthquake simulations in different heterogeneous domains with random source positions and orientations. outputs are time- and space-dependent surface wavefields. the mifno predictions are assessed as good to excellent based on goodness-of-fit (gof) criteria. wave arrival times and wave fronts’ propagation are very accurate since 80 % of the predictions have an excellent phase gof (larger than 8). the fluctuations amplitudes are good for 87 % of the predictions (envelope gof larger than 6) and excellent for 28 %. the envelope score is hindered by the small-scale fluctuations that are challenging to capture due to the spectral bias inherent to neural networks and the complex physical phenomena associated with high-frequency features. nevertheless, the mifno can generalize to sources located outside the training domain and it shows good generalization ability to a real complex overthrust geology. when focusing on a region of interest, transfer learning is an efficient approach to improve the accuracy with limited additional costs, since gof scores improved by more than 1 gof unit with only 500 additional specific samples. the mifno is the first surrogate model offering the flexibility of an earthquake simulator with varying sources and material properties. its good accuracy and massive speed-up offer new perspectives to replace numerical simulations in many-query problems.

an efficient platform for numerical modeling  of partial differential equations
solving partial differential equations (pdes) is a fundamental task for computational electromagnetic and mechanical wave modeling, which hold utmost significance in remote sensing and geophysics. the importance of efficient pdes solving methods lies in their ability to provide rapid simulations and real-time predictions. however, as the scale and dimensionality of the problems increase, the efficiency of current numerical methods becomes a concern. therefore, this study leverages the inherent connection between the temporal-spatial stepping processes and recurrent neural networks (rnns) as well as convolutional layers (cls) to propose a general-purpose recurrent convolutional neural network (rcnn) platform for solving pdes. the rcnn platform rigorously executes the temporal-spatial iterations involved in discretized forms of pdes. furthermore, benefiting from the latest advancements in deep learning, the platform enhances the efficiency of convolutional computations. by applying the rcnn platform to electromagnetic, acoustic wave, and seismic wave modeling, among others, its reliability and high efficiency in solving various high-dimensional pdes are demonstrated.
efficient numerical modeling, machine learning framework, partial differential equations (pdes), recurrent convolutional neural network (rcnn).

stochastic seismic waveform inversion using generative adversarial networks as a geological prior
we present an application of deep generative models in the context of partial differential equation constrained inverse problems. we combine a generative adversarial network representing an a priori model that generates geological heterogeneities and their petrophysical properties, with the numerical solution of the partial-differential equation governing the propagation of acoustic waves within the earth’s interior. we perform bayesian inversion using an approximate metropolis-adjusted langevin algorithm to sample from the posterior distribution of earth models given seismic observations. gradients with respect to the model parameters governing the forward problem are obtained by solving the adjoint of the acoustic wave equation. gradients of the mismatch with respect to the latent variables are obtained by leveraging the differentiable nature of the deep neural network used to represent the generative model. we show that approximate metropolis-adjusted langevin sampling allows an efficient bayesian inversion of model parameters obtained from a prior represented by a deep generative model, obtaining a diverse set of realizations that reflect the observed seismic response.
ill-posed problems · bayes · deep learning · earth modeling

shear-wave velocity prediction of tight reservoirs based on poroelasticity theory: a comparative study of deep neural network and rock physics model
the absence of shear-wave (s-wave) velocity in well log data limits the effective seismic characterization of lithology, petrophysical properties, and fluid distribution of tight reservoirs in the chang 7 shale oil formations of ordos basin, west china. however, conventional rock physics models (rpms), e.g., the xu-white model, struggle to accurately obtain the key parameters such as pore aspect ratio in the process of s-wave velocity prediction. this work performs a comparative study of s-wave velocity prediction based on deep neural network (dnn) and rpm for such reservoirs. by employing the poroelasticity equations which are capable of describing elastic wave propagation in the complex reservoirs saturated with viscous fluid, the relation between elastic and petrophysical properties is established with a dnn-based method. this approach quantifies the connection between p-/s-wave velocities and rock properties. on the other hand, we reformulate the traditional xu-white model by incorporating the decoupled kuster-tokso ̈z (k-t) model and the poroelasticity equations with viscoelastic fluid in the modeling process. the variation of pore aspect ratio with depth is also considered to characterize the complex pore structures, which is appropriate for improving the accuracy of prediction. log data from the three wells are considered for verification, of which results show that the s-wave velocity prediction methods help improve the final result. aided by the dnn-based method, the prediction exhibits a better performance if the training data is sufficient. in particular, provided a small amount of measured s-wave data (even ten data points), the trained dnn model can also provide reasonable predictions.
deep neural network rock physics model wave propagation equation shear-wave velocity prediction shale oil formation

improving seismic wave simulation and inversion using deep learning
accurate simulation of wave motion for the modeling and inversion of seismic wave propagation is a classical high-performance computing (hpc) application using the finite difference, the finite element methods and spectral element methods to solve the wave equations numerically. the paper presents a new method to improve the performance of the seismic wave simulation and inversion by integrating the deep learning software platform and deep learning models with the hpc application. the paper has three contributions: 1) instead of using traditional hpc software, the authors implement the numerical solutions for the wave equation employing recently developed tensor processing capabilities widely used in the deep learning software platform of pytorch. by using pytorch, the classical hpc application is reformulated as a deep learning recurrent neural network (rnn) framework; 2) the authors customize the automatic differentiation of pytorch to integrate the adjoint state method for an efficient gradient calculation; 3) the authors build a deep learning model to reduce the physical model dimensions to improve the accuracy and performance of seismic inversion. the authors use the automatic differentiation functionality and a variety of optimizers provided by pytorch to enhance the performance of the classical hpc application. additionally, methods developed in the paper can be extended into other physics-based scientific computing applications such as computational fluid dynamics, medical imaging, nondestructive testing, as well as the propagation of electromagnetic waves in the earth.
machine learning, inverse problem, wave propagation

deep learning for fast simulation of seismic waves in complex media
the simulation of seismic waves is a core task in many geophysical applications. numerical methods such as finite difference (fd) modelling and spectral element methods (sems) are the most popular techniques for simulating seismic waves, but disadvantages such as their computational cost prohibit their use for many tasks. in this work, we investigate the potential of deep learning for aiding seismic simulation in the solid earth sciences. we present two deep neural networks which are able to simulate the seismic response at multiple locations in horizontally layered and faulted 2-d acoustic media an order of magnitude faster than traditional finite difference modelling. the first network is able to simulate the seismic response in horizontally layered media and uses a wavenet network architecture design. the second network is significantly more general than the first and is able to simulate the seismic response in faulted media with arbitrary layers, fault properties and an arbitrary location of the seismic source on the surface of the media, using a conditional autoencoder design. we test the sensitivity of the accuracy of both networks to different network hyperparameters and show that the wavenet network can be retrained to carry out fast seismic inversion in the same media. we find that are there are challenges when extending our methods to more complex, elastic and 3-d earth models; for example, the accuracy of both networks is reduced when they are tested on models outside of their training distribution. we discuss further research directions which could address these challenges and potentially yield useful tools for practical simulation tasks.


an encoder-decoder deep surrogate for reverse time migration in seismic imaging under uncertainty
seismic imaging faces challenges due to the presence of several uncertainty sources. uncertainties exist in data measurements, source positioning, and subsurface geophysical properties. reverse time migration (rtm) is a highresolution depth migration approach useful for extracting information such as reservoir localization and boundaries. rtm, however, is time-consuming and data-intensive as it requires computing twice the wave equation to generate and store an imaging condition. rtm, when embedded in an uncertainty quantification algorithm (like the monte carlo method), shows a many-fold increase in its computational complexity due to the high input-output dimensionality. in this work, we propose an encoder-decoder deep learning surrogate model for rtm under uncertainty. inputs are an ensemble of velocity fields, expressing the uncertainty, and outputs the seismic images. we show by numerical experimentation that the surrogate model can reproduce the seismic images accurately, and, more importantly, the uncertainty propagation from the input velocity fields to the image ensemble.
reverse time migration  deep learning  surrogate modeling  uncertainty quantification

memory optimization in rnn-based full  waveform inversion using boundary  saving wavefield reconstruction
in wave equation modeling, wavefields propagating over time can be regarded as feedforward in a recurrent neural network (rnn). therefore, the seismic inversion problem based on partial differential wave equations can be addressed using automatic differentiation in the state-of-the-art deep learning frameworks, eliminating the need for explicit backpropagating the residual wavefield. however, one challenge that arises in the context of automatic differentiation is the significant memory usage due to the necessity of storing the hidden states of the rnn (i.e., wavefields in seismic modeling) during forward computation for constructing the computational graph and computing the derivatives during backpropagation. this memory overhead can become a bottleneck, particularly when dealing with large-scale inversion problems. to mitigate this issue, we propose an effective boundary-saving strategy that allows for the reconstruction of the computational graph during the backpropagation process. instead of storing all the intermediate wavefields at each time step, we selectively save the necessary information at the boundaries, thereby significantly reducing the memory footprint. this approach enables us to maintain the convenience and efficiency of automatic differentiation computations while minimizing the memory requirements. both 2-d and 3-d numerical experiments validate the accurate reconstruction of wavefields with minimal loss in precision, while the computational graph is simultaneously reconstructed. consequently, the gradients can also be calculated correctly by automatic differentiation with minimal cpu/graphics processing unit (gpu) memory occupation.
automatic differentiation, boundary saving, full waveform inversion.

deep learning-based groundwater storage estimation from seismic data
in this work, an inverse problem of estimating the water table level and actual stored water in an aquifer from seismic data is studied. both the elastic and poroviscoelastic wave equations are used to model wave propagation in the ground. the equations are spatially discretized using a nodal discontinuous galerkin method, while temporally using the explicit low-storage runge-kutta method. the actual inverse problem is solved using a deep learning approach based the convolutional neural networks. our simulation results suggest that the neural network-based method can be used to accurately estimate the water table level and stored water from noisy data.

an intriguing property of geophysics inversion
inversion techniques are widely used to reconstruct subsurface physical properties (e.g., velocity, conductivity) from surface-based geophysical measurements (e.g., seismic, electric/magnetic (em) data). the problems are governed by partial differential equations (pdes) like the wave or maxwell’s equations. solving geophysical inversion problems is challenging due to the illposedness and high computational cost. to alleviate those issues, recent studies leverage deep neural networks to learn the inversion mappings from measurements to the property directly.  in this paper, we show that such a mapping can be well modeled by a very shallow (but not wide) network with only five layers. this is achieved based on our new finding of an intriguing property: a near-linear relationship between the input and output, after applying integral transform in high dimensional space. in particular, when dealing with the inversion from seismic data to subsurface velocity governed by a wave equation, the integral results of velocity with gaussian kernels are linearly correlated to the integral of seismic data with sine kernels. furthermore, this property can be easily turned into a light-weight encoder-decoder network for inversion. the encoder contains the integration of seismic data and the linear transformation without need for fine-tuning. the decoder only consists of a single transformer block to reverse the integral of velocity.  experiments show that this interesting property holds for two geophysics inversion problems over four different datasets. compared to much deeper inversionnet (wu & lin, 2019), our method achieves comparable accuracy, but consumes significantly fewer parameters.

elastic-adjointnet : a physics guided deep autoencoder to overcome cross talk effects in multiparameter full waveform inversion
full waveform inversion (fwi) is the most popular technique to obtain high resolution estimates of earth model parameters using all information present in seismic. elastic fwi inverts multicomponent data for p and s-wave velocities and densities. we propose an alternative approach for fwi using a combination of machine learning and the physics of wave propagation. unlike a conventional supervised machine learning, we do not require known answers to train our network. the multicomponent shot gathers are input to a convolutional neural network (cnns) based auto encoder whose outputs are used as p-wave, swave and density models that are used to compute synthetic seismograms using the stress-velocity formulation of the elastic wave equation. the synthetic data are compared against observed input data and the misfit is estimated. the gradient of the misfit with respect to the velocity model parameters is calculated using the adjoint state method. the adjoint state gradient is then used to update the network weights using the automatic differentiation technique. once the misfit term converges, the neural network can generate subsurface models consistent with the observed data. we observe that the neural network can capture spatial correlations at different scales and thus can introduce regularization in our inverse problem. the regularization is enough to mitigate the cross-talk problem in elastic fwi and also produce good results in areas with low illumination.

pinnslope: seismic data interpolation and local slope estimation with physics informed neural networks
interpolation of aliased seismic data constitutes a key step in a seismic processing workflow to obtain high quality velocity models and seismic images. leveraging on the idea of describing seismic wavefields as a superposition of local plane waves, we propose to interpolate seismic data by utilizing a physics informed neural network (pinn). in the proposed framework, two feed-forward neural networks are jointly trained using the local plane wave differential equation as well as the available data as two terms in the objective function: a primary network assisted by positional encoding is tasked with reconstructing the seismic data, whilst an auxiliary, smaller network estimates the associated local slopes. results on synthetic and field data validate the effectiveness of the proposed method in handling aliased (sampled coarsely) data and data with large gaps. our method compares favorably against a classic least-squares inversion approach regularized by the local plane-wave equation as well as a pinn-based approach with a single network and pre-computed local slopes. we find that by introducing a second network to estimate the local slopes whilst at the same time interpolating the aliased data, the overall reconstruction capabilities and convergence behavior of the primary network is enhanced. an additional positional encoding, embedded as a network layer, confers to the network the ability to converge faster improving the accuracy of the data term.

synthetic seismic data generation with deep learning
we study the applicability of deep learning (dl) methods to generate acoustic synthetic data from 1d models of the subsurface. we designed and implemented a neural network (nn) and we trained it to generate synthetic seismograms (common shot gathers) from 1-d velocity models on two different datasets: one obtained from published results and the other generated by finite differences (fd) numerical simulation. we furthermore compared the results from the proposed model with the published one. moreover, we tried to to add more flexibility to this methodology by allowing change of wavelet and the acquisition geometry. we obtained good results in terms of both computation efficiency and quality of prediction. the main potentialities of the work are the low computational cost, a high prediction speed and the possibility to solve complex non-linear problems without knowing the physical law behind the phenomenon, which could led great advantages in the solution also of the inverse problem. dl to generate 1-d acoustic synthetic seismograms without solving wave equation solution to the 1-d problem through custom recurrent neural network retraining strategy to improve flexibility and applicability computational complexity analysis.
reflection seismic seismic modelling deep learning machine learning synthetic seismogram

simulating seismic multifrequency wavefields with the fourier feature physics-informed neural network
to simulate seismic wavefields with a frequency-domain wave equation, conventional numerical methods must solve the equation sequentially to obtain the wavefields for different frequencies. the monofrequency equation has the form of a helmholtz equation. when solving the helmholtz equation for seismic wavefields with multiple frequencies, a physics-informed neural network (pinn) can be used. however, the pinn suffers from the problem of spectral bias when approximating high-frequency components. we propose to simulate seismic multifrequency wavefields using a pinn with an embedded fourier feature. the input to the fourier feature pinn for simulating multifrequency wavefields is 4-d, namely the horizontal and vertical spatial coordinates of the model, the horizontal position of the source, and the frequency, and the output is multifrequency wavefields at arbitrary source positions. while an effective fourier feature initialization strategy can lead to optimal convergence in training this network, the fourier feature pinn simulates multifrequency wavefields with reasonable efficiency and accuracy.
neural networks, fuzzy logic; numerical modeling; physics-informed neural network; wave propagation.

physics-guided unsupervised deep-learning seismic inversion with uncertainty quantification
data-driven seismic inversion techniques are often used for estimation of subsurface properties. employing the acoustic or elastic wave equation, inversion starts with approximate initial values of subsurface parameters, which are typically updated in iterative fashion. here, we propose a two-stage unsupervised machine-learning (ml) methodology for efficient and accurate seismic impedance inversion. the first stage utilizes the generalization capability of convolutional neural networks (cnn) to produce realistic estimates of the acoustic impedance (ai), whereas the second stage incorporates physics information to generate synthetic data from the subsurface ai distribution. we also add bayesian layers to the first stage of the network to evaluate the model errors. the proposed probabilistic approach to deep learning allows one to estimate the uncertainty of the inverted parameters, which enhances the interpretability of the model. we apply the algorithm to a poststack data set generated using the cgg hampsonrussell software. after conducting network training with a sufficient number of data points, the network is applied to the rest of the data to estimate the model parameters. the developed approach has a significant advantage over more conventional ml strategies because it produces statistically justified uncertainty maps and eliminates the need to use labeled data for training.
seismic inversion, physics guided machine learning, unsupervised learning, uncertainty quantification, model evaluation.

seismic wavefields modeling with variable  horizontally layered velocity models via  velocity-encoded pinn
seismic modeling is crucial for tackling waveformbased inverse problems in geophysics. physics-informed neural networks (pinns) have become a popular tool for simulating seismic waves. their ability to incorporate partial differential equations (pdes), initial conditions (ics), and boundary conditions directly into the loss function allows for physically accurate modeling. the prevalent approach in the current literature treats the wave equation as a parametric pde. however, the majority of the existing studies simulate wavefields for a specific velocity model, necessitating network retraining for different models, thereby diminishing modeling efficiency. in response, we present a velocity-encoded (ve) pinn (ve-pinn) that introduces feature parameters to represent various layered velocity models, integrating them into the network. drawing inspiration from supervised learning, our approach employs a ve method to compute initial wavefields for variable layered models. remarkably, our proposed ve-pinn demonstrates the ability to generalize across different ics within the dataset. this eliminates the need to retrain the network for each new solution, offering significant efficiency gains. numerical results show that the ve-pinn significantly enhances efficiency in solving the acoustic wave equation for various layered velocity models compared with finite-difference methods (fdms). subsequently, we extend the application of our method to time-domain simulation for variable source locations, demonstrating that the ve-pinn yields the results that are consistent with numerical wavefields.
physics-informed neural network (pinn), seismic modeling, variable velocity models, velocity-encoded (ve) strategy.

sensing and computational frameworks for improving drill-string dynamics  estimation
in this paper, we consider the axial motion of a directional multi-sectional drill-string. the drillstring dynamics are represented by a distributed dynamical model (wave equations) coupled with an ordinary differential equation at the downhole boundary (bit-rock interaction). the interaction between the drill-bit and rock can introduce severe vibrations in the drill-string and result in safety and performance issues. consequently, the performance of drilling is interwoven with our knowledge of the subsurface. to address these problems, we propose a sensing and computational framework for estimating the drill-string dynamics and the specific intrinsic energy of the rocks while drilling. by exploiting the derived models’ particular structure, we combine the drill-string dynamics modeling with top-drive hook-load (force) and hook-speed (velocity) measurements to estimate the force-on-bit without requiring the knowledge of the sub-surface. then, we record and model the seismic radiation patterns of drill-bit rock interactions near the surface (i.e., seismic while drilling). such an idea allows deriving an appropriate estimation of the rocks’ intrinsic energy while drilling. we introduce two alternative rock property estimation algorithms based on direct parameter estimation and machine learning concepts to complete the analysis. the different approaches are tested and validated in simulations. we discuss their respective advantages and drawbacks. finally, we show how to extend our methodologies in the presence of non-linear coulomb friction terms and of coupled axial-torsional oscillations.
dynamical system, distributed system, backstepping, seismic-while-drilling, parameter estimation, neural networks

bridging the gap: deep learning on seismic field data with synthetic training for building gulf of mexico velocity models

a physics-based neural-network way to perform seismic full waveform inversion
seismic full waveform inversion is a common technique that is used in the investigation of subsurface geology. its classic implementation involves forward modeling of seismic wavefield based on a certain type of wave equation, which reflects the physics nature of subsurface seismic wavefield propagation. however, obtaining a good inversion result using traditional seismic waveform inversion methods usually comes with a high computational cost. recently, with the emerging popularity of deep learning techniques in various computer vision tasks, deep neural network (dnn) has demonstrated an impressive ability in dealing with complex nonlinear problems, including seismic velocity inversion. now, extensive efforts have been made in developing a dnn architecture to tackle the problem of seismic velocity inversion, and promising results have been achieved. however, due to the dependence of a labeled dataset, i.e., the barely accessible true velocity model corresponding to real seismic data, the current supervised deep learning inversion framework may suffer from limitations on generalization. one possible solution to mitigate this issue is to impose the governing physics into this kind of purely data-driven method. thus, following the procedures of traditional seismic full waveform inversion, we propose a seismic waveform inversion network, namely swinet, based on wave-equation-based forward modeling network cells. by treating the single-shot observation data and its corresponding shot position as training data pairs, the inverted velocity model can be obtained as the trainable network parameters. moreover, since the proposed seismic waveform inversion method is performed in a neural-network way, its implementation and inversion effect could benefit from some built-in tools in pytorch, such as automatic differentiation, adam optimizer and mini-batch strategy, etc. numerical examples indicate that the swinet method may possess great potential in resulting a good velocity inversion effect with relatively fast convergence and lower computation cost.
acoustic wavefield modeling, deep learning inversion, seismic waveform inversion.

velocity model building with a modified fully convolutional network
we introduce a machine learning based method to estimate the p-wave velocity models directly from the prestack seismic traces using a modified fully convolutional network. the network is tuned to map multi-shot seismic traces to velocity models. we train the network with pairs of synthetic velocity models and their corresponding multi-shot seismic traces which are simulated from the velocity models with acoustic wave equations. multiple shots are used as channels in the network to increase data redundancy. the training process is expensive, but it only occurs once up front. the trained network is then used to predict velocity models from testing seismic traces, and it shows satisfactory prediction results. the cost for predicting velocity models is negligible once the training is complete.

deep‐neural‐networks‐based approaches for biot–squirt model in rock physics
a new cost-effective surrogate model using deep neural network (dnn) for seismic wave propagation in rocks saturated with fluid is presented. in this field, the dispersion/attenuation analysis and wave-field simulation are two key measurements which can be carried out by solving wave equations. the biot–squirt (bisq) equation is a classical wave propagation model in geophysical forward modeling and has been widely used. the solution of such equation, especially by numerical method, is often complex and time-consuming. in this work, a dnn model is trained with the dataset of velocity and inverse quality factor generated from bisq model. the results show that the relative mean square error between the predictions of dnn model and that of bisq model on the test sets are all less than 3%. it indicates that the dnn model has learned the highdimensional space well and then can realize the dispersion/attenuation analysis for any given rock physical parameters. besides, the other well-trained dnn model is used to obtain the simulation results with second-order accuracy according to results by finite difference scheme with first-order accuracy. it reveals that the fast wave-field simulation can be implemented once the results with lower accuracy are obtained.
wave propagation model · deep neural network · training and test · dispersion and attenuation · numerical simulation

